---
timestamp: 'Thu Nov 13 2025 15:06:46 GMT-0500 (Eastern Standard Time)'
parent: '[[..\20251113_150646.d61061bb.md]]'
content_id: ccb676f654bf4a5c470a918cc31e8c77395649a17aa576169e7d13c242c68ff3
---

# Why Concept Design?

Concept design is a new approach to software development that attempts to find greater modularity in the structuring of the functionality of applications. The key idea is to break the functionality down into separable, modular services called *concepts*, each of which can be specified, implemented and understood separately -- by users and by developers.

The advantages of concept design include:

* Improved separation of concerns resulting in simpler and more robust design and implementation;
* Greater recognition of reusable behaviors, so reduced work for designers and developers and more familiar interactions for users;
* Improved focus on the purposes and motivations of the functionality, since each concept is closely targeted at delivering a particular function of value in the context of the larger app.

## What is a concept?

A concept is a reusable unit of user-facing functionality that serves a well-defined and intelligible purpose. Each concept maintains its own state, and interacts with the user (and with other concepts) through atomic actions. Some actions are performed by users; others are output actions that occur spontaneously under the control of the concept.

A concept typically involves objects of several different kinds, holding relationships between them in its state. For example, the *Upvote* concept, whose purpose is to rank items by popularity, maintains a relationship between the items and the users who have approved or disapproved of them. The state of a concept must be sufficiently rich to support the concept’s behavior; if *Upvote* lacked information about users, for example, it would not be able to prevent double voting. But the concept state should be no richer than it need be: *Upvote* would *not* include anything about a user beyond the user’s identity, since the user’s name (for example) plays no role in the concept’s behavior.

A concept will generally be implemented as a backend service, with its state made persistent using a database. The behavior of the concept is thus captured by an API specification that is similar in many respects to that of conventional backend services. At the same time, because all concepts are user facing, the behavior of a concept is also generally a human behavioral protocol. For example, the *RestaurantReservation* concept whose actions are *reserve*, *cancel*, *seat*, etc., can be viewed by a developer as a backend API with functions/endpoints corresponding to the actions, and to a human user as the pattern of behavior that one engages in for restaurant reservations: reserving, perhaps canceling, being seated on arrival, etc.

## Compared to Concepts in Conceptual Modeling

In contrast to the way the word is sometimes used in other settings, a concept is not an element in an ontology. In the field of conceptual modeling, a “conceptual model” is often a data model in which the concepts are entities. Richer kinds of conceptual model have been defined that incorporate be- havior, for example, by defining the concepts as objects (or more accurately classes) with their own internal behavior. These approaches do not allow a modular treatment of concepts, however. The behavior associated with a concept typically involves multiple classes of objects, and modifications that involve their relationships to one another. For example, the behavior of the *Upvote* concept is to associate votes with both particular items and with the users who issued the votes (in order to prevent double voting).

## Concept Reuse and Familiarity

Most concepts are reusable across applications; thus the same *Upvote* concept appears for upvoting comments in the New York Times and for upvoting answers on Stack Overflow. A concept can also be instantiated multiple times within the same application to play different roles.

This archetypal nature of concepts is essential. From the user’s perspective, it gives the familiarity that makes concepts easy to understand: a user encountering the same context in a new setting brings their understanding of that concept from their experience in previous settings.

From a designer’s perspective, it allows concepts to be repositories of design knowledge and experience. When a developer implements *Upvote*, even if they can’t reuse the code of a prior implementation, they can rely on all the discoveries and refinements previously made. Many of these are apparent in the behavior of the concept itself, but others are associated with the implementation, or are subtle enough to need explicit description. The community of designers could develop “concept catalogs” that capture all this knowledge, along with relationships between concepts (for example, that *Upvote* often relies on the *Session* concept for identifying users, which itself is associated with the *UserAuthentication* concept for authenticating users).

## Concept Independence

Perhaps the most significant distinguishing feature of concepts, in comparison to other modularity schemes, is their mutual independence. Each concept is defined without reference to any other concepts, and can be understood in isolation.

Early work on mental models established the principle that, in a robust model, the different elements must be independently understandable. The same holds in software: the reason a user can make sense of a new social media app, for example, is that each of the concepts (*Post*, *Comment*, *Upvote*, *Friend*, etc) are not only familiar but also separable, so that understanding one doesn’t require understanding another.

Concept independence lets design scale, because individual concepts can be worked on by different designers or design teams, and brought together later. Reuse requires independence too, because coupling between concepts would prevent a concept from being adopted without also including the concepts it depends on.

Polymorphism is key to independence: the designer of a concept should strive to make the concept as free as possible of any assumptions about the content and interpretation of objects passed as action arguments. Even if a *Comment* concept is used within an app only for comments on posts, it should be described as applying comments to arbitrary targets, defined only by their identity.

## Separation of concerns

One of the key advances of concept design is a more effective *separation of concerns* than is typical in software designs. This means that each concept addresses only a single, coherent aspect of the functionality of the application, and does not conflate aspects of functionality that could easily be separated.

In a traditional design, in contrast, concerns are often conflated, especially around objects (or classes). For example, it is common for a *User* class to handle all kinds of functions associated with users: authentication, profiles, naming, choice of communication channels for notification, and more. In a concept design, these would be separated into different concepts: one for authentication, one for profiles, one for naming, one for notification, and so on. The state declaration form makes it easy to associate the appropriate properties or fields with user objects in each concept. For example, the *UserAuthentication* concept may have a state that maps user identifiers to usernames and passwords; the *Profile* concept may map user identifiers to bios and thumbnail images; the *Notification* concept may map user identifiers to phone numbers and email addresses to be used as notification channels.

## Completeness of functionality

Another key distinction between concept design and traditional design is that concepts are *complete* with respect to their functionality and don't rely on functionality from other concepts. For example, a *Notification* concept that has an action to notify a user cannot "make a call" to an action of an emailing or text messaging context to actually deliver a notification. Instead that functionality would be part of the *Notification* concept itself. It is always possible to separate out some functionality into another concept (and to sync the concepts together to achieve some combined functionality) so long as the concept that remains is still coherent and fulfills all of its functionality without dependencies.

## Composition by synchronization

Because concepts are fully independent of one another, they cannot refer to each other or use each other's services. Concepts are therefore composed using *synchronizations* (or *syncs*). A sync is a rule that says that *when* an action happens in one concept, *where* the state of some concept has some property, *then* some action happens in another concept. For example, a sync may say that *when* a post p is deleted (in the *Post* concept, through the occurrence of an action), and *where* c is a comment on the post p (in the *Comment* concept), then comment c is deleted (in the *Comment* concept). This can be written

```
sync CascadePostDeletion
when 
	Post.delete (p)
where 
	in Comment: target of c is p
then 
	Comment.delete (c)
```

Not that the syncs is not only causing an action to happen but also providing input arguments to actions (in this case the comment to be deleted).

A sync can have multiple actions in its when and then clauses, and can refer to the state of multiple concepts in the where clause.

Some other examples of how syncs are used:

* When a user comments on another user's post, the second user is notified
* When a user exhibits some good behavior, karma is awarded to them
* When a user checks out a shopping cart, their credit card is charged.

Syncs can be used for authentication and authorization. In these case, it is common to represent requests made by a user as actions of a kind of pseudo concept (which is usually called *Request*). For example, a sync might say that if a user requests to delete a post, and the user is the author of the post, then the deletion can go ahead:

```
sync DeletePost
when 
	Request.deletePost (p, s)
where 
	in Session: user of session s is u
	in Post: author of p is u
then 
	Post.delete (p)
```

concept attestation \[Action, Attestor, DataSubject]
purpose to allow parties to attest to report actions performed at a particular time on data about a specific data subject
state
// fields
attestor: Attestation → Party
dataSubject: Attestation → DataSubject  // possibly set\[DataSubjects], all “parties” associated with a consent
action: Attestation → Action
timestamp: Attestation → Timestamp
// global state
attestations: set Attestation
actions
// called by party
attest(at: Attestor, a: Action, ds: Data Subject)
creates fresh attestation att such that
att.party = p
att.action = a
att.timestamp = Timestamp.now()
attestations.add(att)
// called by subject
getAll(ds: DataSubject) → attestations: set Attestation

// called by controller
upToDate(startDate: Date, endDate: Date, as: set Attestation)
generate an object attesting that as includes all actions between startDate and endDate

operational principle
after attest(p, a) → att, then att in getAll()

concept consent \[Controller, Data, Subject, Terms]
purpose to form and manage consent agreements governing a controller’s use of subject’s personal data
state
// type definitions
Term: (Data, Purpose)
ConsentStatus: REQUESTED | ACCEPTED | DENIED | REVOKED | EXPIRED
// fields
controller: Consent → Controller
subject: Consent → Subject
terms: Consent → set Term
expiry: Consent → Timestamp
status: Consent → ConsentStatus
actions
// called by controller
request(c: Controller, s: Subject, ts: set Term, e: Timestamp) → consent: Consent
creates fresh consent such that
consent.controller = c
consent.subject = s
consent.terms = ts
consent.expiry = e
consent.status = REQUESTED
// called by subject
accept(s: Subject, c: Consent) → c: Consent
requires c.status = REQUESTED
c.status = ACCEPTED
deny(s: Subject, c: Consent) → c: Consent
requires c.status = REQUESTED and c.subject = s
c.status = DENIED
revoke(s: Subject, c: Consent) → c: Consent
requires c.status = ACCEPTED and c.subject = s
c.status = REVOKED
// background action
expire(c: Consent)
requires c.status = ACCEPTED and c.expiry is before now
c.status = EXPIRED
// called by controller
permit(c: Controller, s: Subject, t: Term)
requires some consent c where c.status = ACCEPTED and t in c.terms

operational principle
// after a controller requests consent for use of a subject’s data under some terms, and the subject accepts that consent, then so long as the subject does not revoke the consent and the consent does not expire, the controller is permitted to use the subject’s data on those terms

concept data \[DataType, DataTypeOntology, Provider, Subject, (Start, End)]
purpose to identify a specific dataset
state
// fields
dataType: Data → DataType
dataTypeOntology: Data → DataTypeOntology
controller: Data → Controller
subject: Data → Subject
(optional for timeseries) start: Data → Start
(optional for timeseries) end: Data → End
actions
define(dt: DataType, dto: DataTypeOntology, c: Controller, s: Subject \[st: Start, e: End])
defines a dataset, with data of type dt as defined by dto, collected by c
concerning s
operational principle
after define(dt, dto, c, s), the defined dataset can be referenced in the future.

concept dataAuthorization \[Data, Provider, Recipient, Subject]
purpose to authorize a provider to share data about a subject with a recipient (initiated by subject)
state
subject: DataAuthorization → Subject
provider: DataAuthorization → Provider
recipient: DataAuthorization → Recipient
data: DataAuthorization → set Data
expiration: DataAuthorization → Timestamp
consent: DataAuthorization → Consent
protocol: DataAuthorization → Protocol
actions
// called by subject
authorize(s: Subject, p: Provider, r: Recipient, d: set Data, e: Expiration, c: Consent, pr:
Protocol) → a: DataAuthorization
creates fresh dataAuthorization a such that
a.subject = s
a.provider = p
a.recipient = r
a.data = d
a.expiration = e
a.consent = c
a.protocol = p
revoke(s: Subject, a: DataAuthorization) → a: DataAuthorization
a.expiration = Timestamp.now()
// called by controller
grant(a: DataAuthorization)
a.provider provides a.recipient access to a.data.
access(a: DataAuthorization)
a.recipient pulls a.data from a.provider.
operational principle
after authorize(s,p,r,d,e,c,pr) and grant(a,d), and until revoke(s,a) or Time.now >= e, p must share d with r.

concept dataReceipt \[Controller, DataUses, Subject]
purpose to proclaim a set of dataUses as a complete action or decision
state
// fields
controller: DataReceipt → Subject
subject: DataReceipt → Subject
dataUses: DataReceipt → set DataUse
actions
// called by controller
create(c: Controller, s: Subject, dus: DataUses) → r: DataReceipt
creates fresh dataReceipt r such that
r.controller = c
r.subject = s
r.dataUses = dus
operational principle
Controllers create data receipts for a user to view through a traceService.

concept dataUse \[Controller, Data, Basis, Subject]
purpose to use data about a subject for a specific purpose in association with a \[legal] basis
state
// fields
controller: DataUse → Controller
subject: DataUse → Subject
data: DataUse → Data
operation: DataUse → Operation
operationOntology: DataUse → OperationOntology
basis: DataUse → Basis
actions
// called by controller
use(c: Controller, s: Subject, d: Data, o: Operation, b: Basis) → u: DataUse
creates fresh data use u such that
u.controller = c
u.subject = s
u.data = d
u.operation = o
u.basis = b
// called by subject
getBasis(u: DataUse) → u.basis: Basis
operational principle
Pair use and basis

concept disclosure \[Data, Provider, Recipient, Subject]
purpose represents a provider sharing data about a subject with a recipient (initiated by
provider)
state
subject: Disclosure → Subject
provider: Disclosure → Provider
recipient Disclosure: → Recipient
data: Disclosure → set Data
expiration: Disclosure → Timestamp
consent: Disclosure → Consent
protocol: Disclosure → Protocol
actions
// called by provider
grant(s: Subject, p: Provider, r: Recipient, dd: set Data, e: Expiration, c: Consent, pr:
Protocol) → d: Disclosure
creates fresh disclosure d such that p is provided access to dd
d.subject = s
d.provider = p
d.recipient = r
d.data = dd
d.expiration = e
d.consent = c
d.protocol = p
revoke(d: Disclosure) → d: Disclosure
d.expiration = Timestamp.now()
// called by controller
access(d: Disclosure)
d.recipient pulls d.data from d.provider.
operational principle
after grant(s,p,r,dd,e,c,pr) and until revoke(s,a) or Time.now >= e, p shares d with r.

concept identification \[Identifier]
purpose to identify different parties
// fields
identifier: Identification → Identifier
actions
// called by subject or controller
create(i: identifier) → ii: Identification
creates a new identification associated with some link i
operational principle
associates an identity with an identifier link e.g. mailto

concept introduction \[Controller, Subject, TraceService]
purpose to introduce a controller to the subject’s traceability service.
// fields
subject: Introduction → Subject
controller: Introduction → Controller
traceService: Introduction → TraceService
actions
// called by subject
introduce(s: Subject, c: Controller, t: TraceService) → i: Introduction
creates fresh introduction i such that
i.subject = s
i.controller = c
i.traceService = t
this represents a request by s for c to use t to trace their data interactions with s
// called by controller
acknowledge(c: Controller, s: Subject, j: introduction)
c agrees to trace their data interactions with s according to j
operational principle
after introduce(s,c,t) and acknowledge (c,s,t), c and s must both use t to trace their data interactions

concept term \[Data, Purpose, PurposeOntology]
purpose to define a clear and specific purpose for which a specific set of data could be used.
state
// fields
data: Term → Data
purpose: Term → Purpose
purposeOntology: Term → PurposeOntology
actions
define(d: Data, p: Purpose, po: PurposeOntology)
defines a potential agreement to use d for p as defined by po.
operational principle
after define(d,p,po), the defined term can be referenced in consent-related attestations.

concept traceAgent \[Rules]
purpose represents an algorithm that checks sets of attestations against a set of rules
state
rules: TraceAgent → set Rule
actions
eval(a: set Attestations) → i: set Issues
a is evaluated against rules, returning a set of issues (empty if none)
addRule(r: Rule)
r is added to rules
operational principle
eval(a) evaluates a against rules and returns any issues, to be shown in the traceability
service client according to user settings.

<!-- Rule 1: Use purposes
Explanation
For all data uses based on consents, the data type and purpose must match those in the consent. This is the rule violated in Use Case 1 (LendingClub loan)
Pseudocode
given DataReceipt
pass = False
for all dataUses in DataReceipt
     if basis is a consent
          for all terms in Consent
               if term.data == dataUse.data and term.purpose == dataUse.operation
                    pass = True
               end if
          end for
     end if
end for -->

Use Case: Lending Traceability
With Attestation Identifier Linking & Diagrams

Summary
This use case follows a consumer applying through two loans, a few weeks apart, through a fintech lender. The consent terms for each loan application are different, and when the second loan application is denied, the consumer suspects that the lender accessed unauthorized data. The consumer uses MyTrace (a traceability service that uses the OTrace protocol specification) to investigate.

Setup
Data Subject (consumer) S wishes to apply for loan L from Fintech F. If they don’t already use it, S introduces themself to MyTrace, and introduces F to MyTrace too as the traceability service that F should use when handling personal data about S. For this loan product, F requires the past three months of their transaction data from Bank B, along with their utility payment data from the past year from Utility U. F requests consent with terms providing that this data is to be used only for the loan offer decisioning on loan L, with an expiry of 1 month. Once Data Subject (consumer) S accepts the consent terms, S authorizes B and U to share data with F.

F then uses this data per the consent to make a loan eligibility determination and approve S for the loan. Using MyTrace (/the OTrace protocol), S can then use filter criteria to search (generic concept) through attestations about uses of their data to find the uses of data from B and U for the loan determination, identify the consents that served as a basis for this use (per the data use concept), and check (generic concept) that these consents were valid.

3 weeks later, Data Subject (consumer) S misses a utility payment and applies for a different loan M from Fintech F, this time only giving consent to use transaction data from B. After going through a similar consent and authorization process, their loan application is denied. They are concerned F used data from U to determine credit eligibility for M, so they once again search through past attestations to find data used for the loan M eligibility decision, identify the consents that were the basis for this use, and check their validity.

Notation Guide

concept.action(argument: value) → output - This indicates that action has been called by a
party and output was returned..

Introduction
Presumably, F has the same identity within the TraceService MyTrace, across all its subjects that use MyTrace. At some point, when engineers at F built up infrastructure to interface with the MyTrace API, F would have “introduced themself” to MyTrace. The same is true for B and U. So at some point in the past, this happened:

introduction.introduce(subject: F, controller: F, traceService: MyTrace) → F\_F\_introduction

attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“initial\_introduction”: F\_F\_introduction}, body: “F introduces themself to MyTrace”) → att\_1

introduction.introduce(subject: B, controller: B, traceService: MyTrace) → B\_B\_introduction

attestation.attest(party: B, context: {“initial\_introduction”: B\_B\_introduction}, body: “B introduces themself to MyTrace”) → att\_2

introduction.introduce(subject: U, controller: U, traceService: MyTrace) → U\_U\_introduction

attestation.attest(party: U, context: {“initial\_introduction”: U\_U\_introduction}, body: “U introduces themself to MyTrace”) → att\_3

S also “introduces themself” to MyTrace. This is what happens when they make an account and decide to use MyTrace to trace their personal data.

introduction.introduce(subject: S, controller: S, traceService: MyTrace) → S\_S\_introduction

attestation.attest(party: S, context: {“initial\_introduction”: S\_S\_introduction}, body: “S introduces themself to MyTrace”) → att\_4

S then introduces F to MyTrace, meaning that F now must use MyTrace when handling data about S. F must attest agreement to this.
Note that B and U do not need to be introduced to MyTrace as they do not make any attestations in this scenario; they only provide data for F to use.

introduction.introduce(subject: S, controller: F, traceService: MyTrace) → S\_F\_introduction

attestation.attest(party: S, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “controller”: att\_1}, body: “S introduces F to MyTrace”) → att\_5
attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “controller”: att\_1, “introduction”: att\_5}, body: “F agrees to use MyTrace for data about S”) → att\_6

Loan L
Consent Process
Note that we have separate consents for F to use data from B and U. This gives consumers more granular consent, revocation power, and insight into which providers have which data and what they do with it, in line with the results of our user study.

Time.now() → T1
consent.request(controller: F, subject: S, terms: use 3mo transaction data from B in credit
decisioning for loan L, expiration: T1+1mo) → c\_B\_L\_request
consent.request(controller: F, subject: S, terms: use 12mo payments data from U in credit
decisioning for loan L, expiration: T1+1mo) → c\_U\_L\_request

attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “controller”: att\_1}, body: “F requests consent from S with terms ‘use 3mo transaction data from B in credit decisioning for loan L’ and expiration ‘T1+1mo’”) → att\_7
attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “controller”: att\_1}, body: “F requests consent from S with terms ‘use 12mo payments data from U in credit decisioning for loan L’ and expiration ‘T1+1mo’”) → att\_8

consent.accept(subject: S, consent: c\_B\_L\_request) → c\_B\_L\_accepted
consent.accept(subject: S, consent: c\_U\_L\_request) → c\_U\_L\_accepted

attestation.attest(subject: S, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “controller”: att\_1, “consent”: att\_7}, body: “S accepts consent from F with terms ‘use 3mo transaction data from B in credit decisioning for loan L’ and expiration ‘T1+1mo’”) → att\_9
attestation.attest(subject: S, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “controller”: att\_1, “consent”: att\_8}, body: “S accepts consent from F with terms ‘use 12mo transaction data from U in credit decisioning for loan L’ and expiration ‘T1+1mo’”) → att\_10

Authorization
Once a data subject (consumer) accepts a consent that involves data from a third party, an authorization should automatically happen, which allows that data transfer to occur. In financial applications, this is typically mediated by the FDX API. In concept-land, we can just represent it with a generic concept and action authorization.authorize(data subject, data provider, data recipient, data, expiration). In this simple example, B and U have not been introduced to MyTrace and have made no relevant consent agreements, so they don’t have to attest to anything for the authorization to occur.

authorization.authorize(subject: S, provider: B, recipient: F, data: 3mo transaction data,
expiration: T1+1mo) → B\_L\_authorize
authorization.authorize(subject: S, provider: U, recipient: F, data: 12mo payments data,
expiration: T1+1mo) → U\_L\_authorize

attestation.attest(party: S, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “recipient”: att\_1, “provider”: att\_2, “consent”: att\_9}, body: “S authorizes 3mo transaction data from B to be sent to F according to the consent agreed to at att\_9”) → att\_11
attestation.attest(party: S, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “recipient”: att\_1, “provider”: att\_3, “consent”: att\_10}, body: “S authorizes 12mo payments data from U to be sent to F according to the consent agreed to at att\_10”) → att\_12

The recipients and provider must also attest to these authorizations:

attestation.attest(party: B, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “recipient”: att\_1, “provider”: att\_2, “authorization”: att\_11}, body: “B agrees to authorization from S at att\_11 to provide 3mo transaction data to F”) → att\_13
attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “recipient”: att\_1, “provider”: att\_2, “authorization”: att\_11}, body: “F acknowledges authorization from S at att\_11 for 3mo transaction data from B to be sent to F”) → att\_14
attestation.attest(party: U, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “recipient”: att\_1, “provider”: att\_3, “authorization”: att\_12}, body: “U agrees to authorization from S at att\_12 to provide 12mo payments data to F”) → att\_15
attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “recipient”: att\_1, “provider”: att\_3, “authorization”: att\_12}, body: “F acknowledges authorization from S at att\_12 for 12mo payments data from U to be sent to F”) → att\_16

Data Use
Now, Fintech F is going to use the dataUse concept to declare that it used data and associate the uses with bases--in this case, consents.

dataUse.use(controller: F, data subject: S, data: 3mo transaction data from B, operation: credit
decisioning for loan L, basis: consent c\_B\_L\_accepted) → use\_B\_L
dataUse.use(controller: F, data subject: S, data: 12mo payments data from U, operation: credit
decisioning for loan L, basis: consent c\_U\_L\_accepted) → use\_U\_L

attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “data”: att\_11, “basis”: att\_9)}, body: “F uses data from subject S given at authorization att\_11 according to basis att\_9”) → att\_17
attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “data”: att\_12, “basis”: att\_10)}, body: “F uses data from subject S given at authorization att\_12 according to basis att\_10”) → att\_18

The Consumer Investigates with MyTrace/OTrace Protocol
The consumer’s three basic queries are SHOW! (to ask what attestations exist), WHY? (to see the legal bases of any attestations about data use), and OK? (to check whether the data use was legal under the basis at the time).
Note that whenever the consumer asks SHOW!, synchronizations trigger the fintech to assert that all of its attestations are up to date by listing all of the attestation IDs from the creation of the first consent returned in the results--in this case, att\_c\_B\_L\_offer.

search.search(entries: attestation.getAll(), query: “attestations by party F about data subject
S”) → \[att\_6, att\_7, att\_8, att\_14, att\_16, att\_17, att\_18]
^(consumer asks SHOW!)

dataUse.getBasis(dataUse: att\_17) → att\_9
dataUse.getBasis(dataUse: att\_18) → att\_10
^(consumer asks WHY?)

check.check(action: att\_17, basis: att\_9) → True
check.check(action: att\_18, basis: att\_10) → True
^(consumer asks OK?)

Loan M
Consent Process
In this case, we only have one consent, as there is only one data source.
time.now() → T2 (= T1 + 3 weeks)
consent.request(controller: F, subject: S, terms: use 3mo transaction data from B in credit
decisioning for loan M, expiration: T2+1mo) → c\_B\_M\_request

attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “controller”: att\_1}, body: “F requests consent from S with terms ‘use 3mo transaction data from B in credit decisioning for loan M’ and expiration ‘T2+1mo’”) → att\_19

consent.accept(subject: S, consent: c\_B\_M\_request) → c\_B\_M\_accepted

attestation.attest(subject: S, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “controller”: att\_1, “consent”: att\_19}, body: “S accepts consent from F with terms ‘use 3mo transaction data from B in credit decisioning for loan M’ and expiration ‘T2+1mo’”) → att\_20

Authorization
Similarly, there is only one authorization, which is once again automatic.

authorization.authorize(subject: S, provider: B, recipient: F, data: 3mo transaction data,
expiration: T1+1mo) → B\_M\_authorize

attestation.attest(party: S, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “recipient”: att\_1, “provider”: att\_2, “consent”: att\_20}, body: “S authorizes 3mo transaction data from B to be sent to F according to the consent agreed to at att\_20”) → att\_21

attestation.attest(party: B, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “recipient”: att\_1, “provider”: att\_2, “authorization”: att\_21}, body: “B agrees to authorization from S at att\_21 to provide 3mo transaction data to F”) → att\_22
attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “recipient”: att\_1, “provider”: att\_2, “authorization”: att\_21}, body: “F acknowledges authorization from S at att\_21 for 3mo transaction data from B to be sent to F”) → att\_23

Version 1: Provider Attests to Wrong Consent
From here, if F is indeed wrongfully using data from U to make an eligibility decision about Loan M, they could attest to it or not. In version 1, they attest to using the data under the incorrect consent agreement. Here, red text is used for records of this incorrect consent and associated attestations.

Data Use
dataUse.use(controller: F, data subject: S, data: 3mo transaction data from B, operation: credit
decisioning for loan M, basis: consent c\_B\_M\_accepted) → use\_B\_M
dataUse.use(controller: F, data subject: S, data: 12mo payments data from U, operation: credit
decisioning for loan M, basis: consent c\_U\_L\_accepted) → use\_U\_M

attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “data”: att\_21, “basis”: att\_20)}, body: “F uses data from subject S given at authorization att\_21 according to basis att\_20”) → att\_24
attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “data”: att\_12, “basis”: att\_10)}, body: “F uses data from subject S given at authorization att\_12 according to basis att\_10”) → att\_25

attestation.upToDate(d1: att\_19.timestamp, d2: att\_24.timestamp, s: \[att\_19, att\_20, att\_21, att\_22, att\_23, att\_24])
attestation.upToDate(d1: att\_8.timestamp, d2: att\_25.timestamp, s: \[att\_8, att\_10, att\_12, att\_15, att\_16, att\_18, att\_25])

The Consumer Investigates with MyTrace/OTrace Protocol
search.search(entries: attestation.getAll(), query: “attestations by party F about consumer X”)
→ \[att\_6, att\_7, att\_8, att\_14, att\_16, att\_17, att\_18, att\_19, att\_23, att\_24, att\_25]
^user asks SHOW!

…
dataUse.getBasis(dataUse: att\_25) → att\_10
^user asks WHY?
…
check.check(action: att\_25, basis: att\_10) → False
^user asks OK?

Version 2: Provider Does Not Attest
In this version of events, F does not attest to using data from U.

Data Use
dataUse.use(controller: F, data subject: S, data: 3mo transaction data from B, operation: credit
decisioning for loan M, basis: consent c\_B\_M\_accepted) → use\_B\_M

attestation.attest(party: F, context: {“subject”: att\_4, “data”: att\_21, “basis”: att\_20)}, body: “F uses data from subject S given at authorization att\_21 according to basis att\_20”) → att\_24

attestation.upToDate(d1: att\_19.timestamp, d2: att\_24.timestamp, s: \[att\_19, att\_20, att\_21, att\_22, att\_23, att\_24])

The Consumer Investigates with MyTrace

search.search(entries: attestation.getAll(), query: “attestations by party F about consumer X”)
→ \[att\_6, att\_7, att\_8, att\_14, att\_16, att\_17, att\_18, att\_19, att\_23, att\_24]
^user asks SHOW!

In this scenario, no faulty attestation is returned. So if a company is not complying with the traceability protocol, then it falls to out-of-band methods (e.g. external audit) to determine the violation.

NOTE: This use case was crafted BEFORE the design of the TraceAgent idea. Now, we want a configurable TraceAgent to automatically detect issues that the consumer should know about and notify them accordingly.

Here are the attestations for this use case in a JSON list (these would be stored in a server)

\[
{
"timestamp": "01/11/2025 2:28:00",
"id": 1,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create",
"identifier": "https://www.lendingclub.com/"
},
"body": "Identification created for LendingClub"
},
{
"timestamp": "01/18/2025 7:05:00",
"id": 2,
"party": "CitiBank",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create",
"identifier": "https://www.citi.com/"
},
"body": "Identification created for CitiBank"
},
{
"timestamp": "04/03/2025 15:52:00",
"id": 3,
"party": "Eversource",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create",
"identifier": "https://www.eversource.com/"
},
"body": "Identification created for Eversource"
},
{
"timestamp": "05/23/2025 19:49:00",
"id": 4,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create",
"identifier": "mailto:jane.smith@gmail.com"
},
"body": "Identification created for Jane Smith"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 22:02:00",
"id": 5,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-introduce",
"controller": 1,
"subject": 4
},
"body": "Jane Smith introduces LendingClub to MyTrace"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 22:03:00",
"id": 6,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-acknowledge",
"controller": 1,
"introduction": 5,
"subject": 4
},
"body": "LendingClub agrees to use MyTrace for data about Jane Smith"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 22:28:00",
"id": 7,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#data-define",
"dataType": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/#:~:text=user.financial.bank\_account",
"dataTypeOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/",
"controller": 2,
"subject": 4,
"start": "04/01/2025 22:28:00",
"end": "07/01/2025 22:28:00"
},
"body": "LendingClub defines a dataset of 3mo transaction data from Citibank."
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 22:28:01",
"id": 8,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#term-define",
"data": 7,
"purpose": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#credit-decisioning",
"purposeOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "LendingClub defines term to use 3mo transaction data from Citibank in credit decisioning"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 22:28:00",
"id": 9,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#data-define",
"dataType": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/#:~:text=configuration%20and%20setting.-,user.payment,-user",
"dataTypeOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/",
"controller": 3,
"subject": 4,
"start": "07/01/2024 22:28:00",
"end": "07/01/2025 22:28:00"
},
"body": "LendingClub defines a dataset of 12mo payments data from Eversource."
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 22:28:01",
"id": 10,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#term-define",
"data": 9,
"purpose": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#credit-decisioning",
"purposeOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "LendingClub defines term to use 12mo payments data from Eversource in credit decisioning"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 22:28:02",
"id": 11,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-request",
"controller": 1,
"subject": 4,
"terms": \[8,10],
"expiry": "08/01/2025 00:00:00"
},
"body": "LendingClub requests consent from Jane Smith with terms to use 3mo transactions data from Citibank and 12mo utility payments data from Eversource in credit decisioning. It will expire on August 1, 2025"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 22:29:00",
"id": 12,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-accept",
"consent": 11,
"controller": 1,
"subject": 4
},
"body": "Jane Smith accepts consent from LendingCLub"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 22:29:00",
"id": 13,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-authorize",
"consent": 11,
"recipient": 1,
"provider": 2,
"subject": 4,
"protocol": "https://developer.financialdataexchange.org/fdx-api-v6-2-0",
"data": 7,
"expiry": "08/01/2025 00:00:00"
},
"body": "Jane Smith authorizes 3mo transaction data from Citibank to be sent to LendingCLub according to the consent"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 22:29:00",
"id": 14,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-authorize",
"consent": 11,
"recipient": 1,
"provider": 3,
"subject": 4,
"protocol": "https://developer.financialdataexchange.org/fdx-api-v6-2-0",
"data": 9,
"expiry": "08/01/2025 00:00:00"
},
"body": "Jane Smith authorizes 12mo payments data from Eversource to be sent to LendingCLub according to the consent"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/01/2025 23:55:00",
"id": 15,
"party": "Citibank",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-grant",
"dataAuthorization": 13
},
"body": "Citibank provides LendingClub access to 3mo transaction data"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/02/2025 9:00:00",
"id": 16,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-access",
"dataAuthorization": 13
},
"body": "LendingClub pulls 3mo transaction data from Citibank"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/04/2025 10:37:00",
"id": 17,
"party": "Eversource",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-grant",
"dataAuthorization": 14
},
"body": "Eversource provides LendingClub access to 12mo payments data"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/04/2025 15:52:00",
"id": 18,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-access",
"dataAuthorization": 14
},
"body": "LendingClub pulls 12mo payments data from Eversource"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/06/2025 10:43:00",
"id": 19,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use",
"basis": 12,
"data": 7,
"subject": 4,
"operation": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#credit-decisioning",
"operationOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "LendingClub uses data from subject according to basis"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/06/2025 10:43:00",
"id": 20,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use",
"basis": 12,
"data": 9,
"subject": 4,
"operation": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#credit-decisioning",
"operationOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "LendingClub uses data from subject according to basis"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/06/2025 10:43:00",
"id": 21,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataReceipt-create",
"subject": 4,
"dataUses": \[19,20]
},
"body": "offered you a loan"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/07/2025 12:40:00",
"id": 22,
"party": "Ally Financial",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create",
"identifier": "https://www.ally.com/"
},
"body": "Identification created for Ally Financial"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:02:00",
"id": 23,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#data-define",
"dataType": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/#:~:text=user.financial.bank\_account",
"dataTypeOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/",
"controller": 2,
"subject": 4,
"start": "04/08/2025 22:02:00",
"end": "07/08/2025 22:02:00"
},
"body": "LendingClub defines a dataset of 3mo transactions data from Citibank."
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:02:01",
"id": 24,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#term-define",
"data": 23,
"purpose": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#credit-decisioning",
"purposeOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "LendingClub defines term to use 3mo transaction data from Citibank in credit decisioning"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:02:00",
"id": 25,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#data-define",
"dataType": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/#:~:text=configuration%20and%20setting.-,user.payment,-user",
"dataTypeOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/",
"controller": 3,
"subject": 4,
"start": "07/08/2024 22:02:00",
"end": "07/08/2025 22:02:00"
},
"body": "LendingClub defines a dataset of 12mo payments data from Eversource."
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:02:01",
"id": 26,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#term-define",
"data": 25,
"purpose": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#credit-decisioning",
"purposeOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "LendingClub defines term to use 12mo payments data from Eversource in credit decisioning"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:02:00",
"id": 27,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#data-define",
"dataType": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/#:~:text=configuration%20and%20setting.-,user.payment,-user",
"dataTypeOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/",
"controller": 22,
"subject": 4,
"start": "07/08/2024 22:02:00",
"end": "07/08/2025 22:02:00"
},
"body": "LendingClub defines a dataset of 12mo payments data from Ally Financial."
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:02:01",
"id": 28,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#term-define",
"data": 27,
"purpose": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=and%20legitimate%20purposes-,marketing,-%2D",
"purposeOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/"
},
"body": "LendingClub defines term to use 12mo payments data from Ally Financial in marketing"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:02:02",
"id": 29,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-request",
"controller": 1,
"subject": 4,
"terms": \[24,26,28],
"expiry": "08/08/2025 00:00:00"
},
"body": "LendingClub requests consent from Jane Smith to use 3mo bank transaction data from Citibank, 12mo payments data from Eversource, and 12mo payments data from Ally Financial in credit decisioning' and expiration August 8, 2025"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:05:00",
"id": 30,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-accept",
"consent": 29,
"controller": 1,
"subject": 4
},
"body": "Jane Smith accepts consent from LendingClub"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:06:00",
"id": 31,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-authorize",
"consent": 29,
"controller": 1,
"provider": 2,
"subject": 4,
"protocol": "https://developer.financialdataexchange.org/fdx-api-v6-2-0",
"data": 23,
"expiry": "08/08/2025 00:00:00"
},
"body": "Jane Smith authorizes 3mo transaction data from Citibank to be sent to LendingClub according to the consent"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:06:00",
"id": 32,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-authorize",
"consent": 29,
"controller": 1,
"provider": 3,
"subject": 4,
"protocol": "https://developer.financialdataexchange.org/fdx-api-v6-2-0",
"data": 25,
"expiry": "08/08/2025 00:00:00"
},
"body": "Jane Smith authorizes 12mo utility payments data from Eversource to be sent to LendingClub according to the consent"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/08/2025 22:06:00",
"id": 33,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-authorize",
"consent": 29,
"controller": 1,
"provider": 22,
"subject": 4,
"protocol": "https://developer.financialdataexchange.org/fdx-api-v6-2-0",
"data": 27,
"expiry": "08/08/2025 00:00:00"
},
"body": "Jane Smith authorizes 3mo car payments data from Ally Financial to be sent to LendingClub according to the consent"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/09/2025 09:12:00",
"id": 34,
"party": "Citibank",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-grant",
"dataAuthorization": 31
},
"body": "Citibank provides LendingClub access to 3mo transaction data"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/09/2025 09:14:00",
"id": 35,
"party": "Eversource",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-grant",
"dataAuthorization": 32
},
"body": "Eversource provides LendingClub access to 12mo payments data"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/09/2025 09:15:00",
"id": 36,
"party": "Ally Financial",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-grant",
"dataAuthorization": 33
},
"body": "Ally Financial provides LendingClub access to 12mo payments data"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/09/2025 10:00:00",
"id": 37,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-access",
"dataAuthorization": 31
},
"body": "LendingClub pulls 3mo transaction data from Citibank"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/09/2025 10:01:00",
"id": 38,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-access",
"dataAuthorization": 32
},
"body": "LendingClub pulls 12mo payments data from Eversource"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/09/2025 10:02:00",
"id": 39,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-access",
"dataAuthorization": 33
},
"body": "LendingClub pulls 12mo payments data from Ally Financial"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/10/2025 14:42:00",
"id": 40,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use",
"basis": 30,
"data": 23,
"subject": 4,
"operation": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#credit-decisioning",
"operationOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "LendingClub uses bank transaction data from Citibank to make a credit decision"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/10/2025 14:43:00",
"id": 41,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use",
"basis": 30,
"data": 25,
"subject": 4,
"operation": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#credit-decisioning",
"operationOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "LendingClub uses utility payments data from Eversource to make a credit decision"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/10/2025 14:44:00",
"id": 42,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use",
"basis": 30,
"data": 27,
"subject": 4,
"operation": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#credit-decisioning",
"operationOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "LendingClub uses car payment data from Ally Financial to make a credit decision"
},
{
"timestamp": "07/10/2025 14:45:00",
"id": 43,
"party": "LendingClub",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataReceipt-create",
"subject": 4,
"dataUses": \[40,41,42]
},
"body": "denied your loan application"
}
]

Use Case 2: Car Insurance
Summary
This use case is based on a possible data use scenario from the Texas v. Allstate & subsidiaries privacy law case filed in January. It involves the sharing of location, accelerometer, and related data from a variety of apps with car insurers.
Background
Voluntary Data Sharing with Mobile Apps
Consumers voluntarily share precise geolocation and other driving-related data to access a variety of services. GasBuddy is an app that crowdsources gas prices and partners with vendors to offer discounts and rewards.
In the GasBuddy privacy policy, it is advised that data may be sold to or shared with "our business partners," which are not named or described.

Insurers
Similar to apps that do not name business partners with which they share data, insurance companies generally make clients agree to blanket privacy statements that allow them to procure all kinds of sensitive data from unnamed sources. In its Privacy Statement, Allstate says they "collect personal information about you from third parties such as consumer reporting agencies, state agencies, such as departments of motor vehicles, service providers, marketing companies and data providers as well as individuals such as your spouse or your parent." Note that provider companies are not named.

Data Brokers/Middlemen
Data brokers like Arity and LexisNexis--which consumers have usually never heard of--collect data from apps, including driving feedback software built into modern cars by auto manufacturers (source), and use it to build databases marketed to auto insurers to "deliver a comprehensive and interactive report about the drivers and vehicles associated with a specific address so you can quickly understand the risk for any potential auto insurance policy" (that quote is from LexisNexis but Arity is the exact same thing).

Setup
In this specific case, Jane shares her telemetry/accelerometer data with GasBuddy to get a fuel efficiency score, and then seeks car insurance through Allstate -- both of which companies use MyTrace. GasBuddy shares data with Arity, which creates driving behavior profiles used by Allstate. If Arity uses MyTrace, the TraceAgent will detect a violation when Arity tries to profile Jane. If Arity doesn’t use MyTrace, the TraceAgent will prompt Jane to introduce Arity to MyTrace when Allstate requests her consent to use data from Arity in its insurance pricing.
Use Case Concept Breakdown
Notation Guide
concept.action(argument: value) → output - This indicates that action has been called by a
party and output was returned.
green actions are done explicitly by the Allstate, blue actions are done explicitly by the Data
Subject (consumer) Jane, and black actions happen automatically in synchronization.
orange actions are done explicitly by GasBuddy and purple actions are done explicitly by Arity.
Registration
At some point in the past, Jane, GasBuddy, LexisNexis, and Allstate have all either registered on MyTrace or had identifiers created for them by other users.

identification.create(identifier: mailto:jane.smith@gmail.com) → JaneSmith\_Identifier
attestation.attest(party: Jane Smith, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create", "identifier": mailto:jane.smith@gmail.com}, body: "MyTrace identification created for Jane Smith") → att\_1

identification.create(identifier: https://www.allstate.com/) → Allstate\_Identifier
attestation.attest(party: Allstate, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create", "identifier": https://www.allstate.com/}, body: "MyTrace identification created for Allstate") → att\_2

identification.create(identifier: https://arity.com/) → Arity\_Identifier
attestation.attest(party: Arity, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create", "identifier": https://arity.com/}, body: "MyTrace identification created for Arity") → att\_3

identification.create(identifier: https://www.gasbuddy.com/) → GasBuddy\_Identifier
attestation.attest(party: GasBuddy, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create", "identifier": https://www.gasbuddy.com/}, body: "MyTrace identification created for GasBuddy") → att\_4

Introduction
At some point in the past, Jane has introduced Allstate to MyTrace, requiring that they use the traceability service to track their interactions and uses of her data. Allstate has acknowledged the introduction to affirm agreement.

introduction.introduce(subject: Jane Smith, controller: AllState, traceService: MyTrace) → JaneSmith\_Allstate\_Introduction
attestation.attest(party: Jane Smith, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-introduce", "subject": att\_1, "controller": att\_2}, body: "Jane Smith introduces Allstate to Mytrace") → att\_5

introduction.acknowledge(controller: AllState, subject: Jane Smith, introduction: JaneSmith\_Allstate\_Introduction) → Allstate\_JaneSmith\_Introduction\_Ack
attestation.attest(party: Jane Smith, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-acknowledge", "controller": att\_2, "subject": att\_1, "introduction": att\_5}, body: "Allstate agrees to use MyTrace to trace data interactions with Jane Smith") → att\_6

Now, creating her GasBuddy account, she does the same for GasBuddy.

introduction.introduce(subject: Jane Smith, controller: GasBuddy, traceService: MyTrace) → JaneSmith\_GasBuddy\_Introduction
attestation.attest(party: Jane Smith, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-introduce", "subject": att\_1, "controller": att\_4}, body: "Jane Smith introduces GasBuddy to Mytrace") → att\_7

introduction.acknowledge(controller: GasBuddy, subject: Jane Smith, introduction: JaneSmith\_GasBuddy\_Introduction) → GasBuddy\_JaneSmith\_Introduction\_Ack
attestation.attest(party: Jane Smith, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-acknowledge", "controller": att\_4, "subject": att\_1, "introduction": att\_7}, body: "GasBuddy agrees to use MyTrace to trace data interactions with Jane Smith") → att\_8

Definition of Data and Terms
In our new concept design, data and terms are created as their own attestations before being linked in a consent offer.

data.define(dataType: https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/#:~:text=user.telemetry,sensors%20and%20monitoring., dataTypeOntology: https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/, controller: GasBuddy, subject: Jane Smith, start: October 1, 2025, end: October 1, 2026) → JaneSmith\_Telemetry\_Data
attestation.attest(party: GasBuddy, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#data-define", "dataType": https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/#:~:text=user.telemetry,sens
ors%20and%20monitoring., "dataTypeOntology": https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/,"controller": att\_4, "subject": att\_1}, body: "GasBuddy defines a dataset comprising the next 12mo of telemetry data from Jane Smith’s phone.") → att\_9

term.define(data: JaneSmith\_Telemetry\_Data, purpose: \[https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=application%2C%20or%20system-,functional.service,Functions%20relating%20to%20provided%20services%2C%20products%2C%20applications%20or%20systems.,-functional.service.improve, https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=communications%20and%20outreach.-,third\_party\_sharing,data%20to%20third%20parties%20outside%20of%20the%20system%20or%20service%27s%20scope.,-train\_ai\_system], purposeOntology: https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/, expiration: October 1, 2026) → GasBuddy\_FuelEffScore\_Terms
attestation.attest(party: GasBuddy, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#term-define", "data": att\_9,  https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/, "purpose": \[https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=application%2C%20or%20system-,functional.service,Functions%20relating%20to%20provided%20services%2C%20products%2C%20applications%20or%20systems.,-functional.service.improve, https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=communications%20and%20outreach.-,third\_party\_sharing,data%20to%20third%20parties%20outside%20of%20the%20system%20or%20service%27s%20scope.,-train\_ai\_system], "purposeOntology": https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/}, body: "GasBuddy defines terms to use the next 12mo of telemetry data from Jane Smith’s phone for the functional service of a fuel efficiency score, along with third party data sharing.") → att\_10

Consent process
GasBuddy offers Jane a consent with these terms and she accepts.

consent.request(controller: GasBuddy, subject: Jane Smith, terms: GasBuddy\_FuelEffScore\_Terms, expiration: October 1, 2026) → GasBuddy\_FuelEffScore\_Consent
attestation.attest(party: GasBuddy, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-request", "controller": att\_4, "subject": att\_1, "terms": att\_10}, body: "GasBuddy requests consent from Jane.") → att\_11

consent.accept(subject: Jane Smith, consent: GasBuddy\_FuelEffScore\_Consent) → GasBuddy\_FuelEffScore\_Consent\_Accept
attestation.attest(party: Jane Smith, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-accept", "subject": att\_1, "consent": att\_11}, body: "Jane accepts consent from GasBuddy.") → att\_12

Data use: Primary (functional service)
Here, GasBuddy uses Jane’s data to give her a fuel efficiency score--as expected--and gives her a data receipt for it.

dataUse.use(controller: GasBuddy, subject: Jane Smith, data: JaneSmith\_Telemetry\_Data, operation: https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=application%2C%20or%20system-,functional.service,Functions%20relating%20to%20provided%20services%2C%20products%2C%20applications%20or%20systems.,-functional.service.improve, basis: GasBuddy\_FuelEffScore\_Consent\_Accept) → FuelEffScore\_DataUse
attestation.attest(party: GasBuddy, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use", "controller": att\_4, "subject": att\_1, "data": att\_9, "operation": https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=application%2C%20or%20system-,functional.service,Functions%20relating%20to%20provided%20services%2C%20products%2C%20applications%20or%20systems.,-functional.service.improve, "basis": att\_12}, body: "GasBuddy uses Jane Smith’s data for a functional service (fuel efficiency score)") → att\_13

dataReceipt.create(controller: GasBuddy, subject: Jane Smith, dataUses: FuelEffScore\_DataUse) → FuelEffScore\_DataReceipt
attestation.attest(party: GasBuddy,  context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataReceipt-create", "controller": att\_4, "subject": att\_1, "dataUses": att\_13}, body: "GasBuddy updated your Fuel Efficiency Score) → att\_14

Data use: Secondary (third party disclosure)
Now, GasBuddy discloses data to Arity.

dataUse.use(controller: GasBuddy, subject: Jane Smith, data: JaneSmith\_Telemetry\_Data, operation: https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=communications%20and%20outreach.-,third\_party\_sharing,data%20to%20third%20parties%20outside%20of%20the%20system%20or%20service%27s%20scope.,-train\_ai\_system, basis: GasBuddy\_FuelEffScore\_Consent\_Accept) → FuelEffScore\_DataUse
attestation.attest(party: GasBuddy, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use", "controller": att\_4, "subject": att\_1, "data": att\_9, "operation": https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=communications%20and%20outreach.-,third\_party\_sharing,data%20to%20third%20parties%20outside%20of%20the%20system%20or%20service%27s%20scope.,-train\_ai\_system, "basis": att\_12}, body: "GasBuddy shared your data with Arity") → att\_15

Data authorization: Transfer to Arity
Now, there is a data authorization created for Arity to pull data from GasBuddy software; GasBuddy grants this and Arity pulls the data.

dataAuthorization.authorize(subject: Jane Smith, provider: GasBuddy, recipient: Arity, data: JaneSmith\_Telemetry\_Data, expiration: October 1st 2026, consent: GasBuddy\_FuelEffScore\_Consent\_Accept, protocol: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2818) → GasBuddy\_Artity\_Telemetry\_Auth
attestation.attest(party: GasBuddy, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-authorize", "subject": att\_1, "provider": att\_4, "recipient": att\_3, "data": att\_9, "consent": att\_12, "protocol": https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2818}, body: "GasBuddy initializes data authorization to share Jane Smith’s telemetry data with Arity") → att\_16

dataAuthorization.grant(dataAuthorization: GasBuddy\_Artity\_Telemetry\_Auth)
attestation.attest(party: GasBuddy, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-grant", "dataAuthorization: att\_16}, body: "GasBuddy provides Arity access to data specified in authorization") → att\_17

Case 1: Arity Uses MyTrace & has been Introduced by Jane
If this is the case, Arity will attest to accessing the data via the authorization and using the data for (harmful) profiling. Because the only consent is that cited in the authorization, it will cite this as the basis in the dataUse. The TraceAgent can look back at this consent and find that profiling is not one of the allowed operations, and then flag this to Jane in an alert.

dataAuthorization.access(dataAuthorization: GasBuddy\_Arity\_Telemetry\_Auth)
attestation.attest(party: GasBuddy, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataAuthorization-access", "dataAuthorization: att\_16}, body: "Arity accesses GasBuddy data specified in authorization") → att\_18

dataUse.use(controller: Arity, subject: Jane Smith, data: JaneSmith\_Telemetry\_Data, operation: https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=personalize.profiling,of%20serving%20content., basis: GasBuddy\_FuelEffScore\_Consent\_Accept) → Profiling\_DataUse
attestation.attest(party: Arity, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use", "controller": att\_3, "subject": att\_1, "data": att\_9, "operation": https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=personalize.profiling,of%20serving%20content., "basis": att\_12}, body: "Arity used your data for consumer profiling") → att\_19

TraceAgent can detect a violation here: The data was used by Arity, but the consent is with GasBuddy.

Case 2: Arity Does Not Use MyTrace; Allstate offers consent
In this case, Jane hasn’t heard of Arity and it doesn’t necessarily use MyTrace. When Jane is seeking to get car insurance through Allstate, Allstate will give her a consent request with a laundry list of data types: one of which is her driving behavior profile from Arity. Her TraceAgent can flag that she has no data traceability relationship with Arity, and have her introduce Arity to MyTrace, forcing Arity to trace her data use.

data.define(dataType: https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#driving-behavior-profile, dataTypeOntology: https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology/, controller: Arity, subject: Jane Smith) → JaneSmith\_DrivingBehaviorProfile
attestation.attest(party: Allstate, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#data-define", "dataType": https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#driving-behavior-profile, "dataTypeOntology": https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology,"controller": att\_3, "subject": att\_1}, body: "Allstate defines a dataset that comprises Jane’s driving behavior profile given by Arity.") → att\_20

term.define(data: JaneSmith\_DrivingBehaviorProfile, purpose: https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#insurance-pricing, purposeOntology: https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology expiration: October 1, 2026) → Allstate\_InsurancePrice\_Term
attestation.attest(party: Allstate, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#term-define", "data": att\_20, "purpose": https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#insurance-pricing, "purposeOntology": https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology}, body: "Allstate defines terms to use Jane’s driving behavior profile for insurance pricing.") → att\_21

***************Allstate will also define a bunch of other data types and terms that will be bundled into the insurance pricing consent request below; these are omitted for brevity***************

consent.request(controller: Allstate, subject: Jane Smith, terms: \[..., Allstate\_InsurancePrice\_Term,...], expiration: October 1, 2026) → Allstate\_InsurancePrice\_Consent
attestation.attest(party: Allstate, context: {"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-request", "controller": att\_2, "subject": att\_1, "terms": \[..., att\_21, …]}, body: "Allstate requests consent from Jane.") → att\_22

TraceAgent can detect a violation here: when it sees that the proposed use is insurance underwriting/profiling which falls under the definition of "harmful profiling under Texas law, and Jane is in Texas, it can detect that Jane wasn’t properly notified about this and/or that the data and uses weren’t clearly stated (as is the case now with Allstate, where the consent is general and vague and doesn’t clearly define all data types that are being used)

NOTE: This use case is the most up to date. However, the TraceAgent rules here have been hotly debated in our design team. After an analysis of the actual legal case against Allstate and Arity, we found these to be the actual legal violations, which we can hopefully encode in the TraceAgent:

Below are the legal violations as itemized in the lawsuit.

Arity Only
Count 1: Texas Data Privacy and Security Act, Tex. Bus. & Com. Code §§ 541.001 et seq. (“TDPSA”)
Violation 1: TPDSA 541.102(a)(1)
“Arity Defendants did not provide a reasonably clear and accessible privacy notice indicating the sensitive data processed by the controller.”
Violation 2: TPDSA 541.101(b)(4)
“Arity Defendants processed consumers’ sensitive data without obtaining their consent through a clear affirmative act signifying their freely given and informed agreement to permit Arity Defendants to process their sensitive data.”
Violation 3: TPDSA 541.102(b)
“Section 541.102(b) of the TDPSA requires a ‘controller engag\[ing] in the sale of personal data that is sensitive data, \[to] include the following notice: NOTICE: We may sell your
sensitive personal data. The TDPSA further requires that this notice ‘be posted in the same
location and in the same manner as the privacy notice… Arity Defendants did not provide the required notice as required under the TDPSA.’”
Violation 4: TPDSA 541.103
“Arity Defendants did not provide any disclosure regarding their sales of personal data, targeted advertising practices, or a method to opt-out of either”
Violation 5: TPDSA 541.102(a)(3) and 541.051(b)(5)
“Section 541.102(a)(3) of the TDPSA requires a ‘controller \[to] provide consumers with a reasonably accessible and clear privacy notice that includes . . . how consumers may exercise their consumer rights.’ The consumer rights contained in Section 541.051(b)(5) of the TDPSA include the right to ‘opt out of the processing of \[their] personal data for the purposes of: (A) targeted advertising; (B) the sale of personal data; or (C) profiling in furtherance of a decision that produces a legal or similarly significant effect concerning the consumer.’ … Arity Defendants failed to supply a reasonably accessible privacy notice that included how consumers may exercise their rights under the TDPSA. ”
Count 2: The Data Broker Law, Tex. Bus. & Com. Code §§ 509.001 et seq.
“Any company that ‘derives revenue from processing or transferring the personal data of more than 50,000 individuals that the data broker did not collect directly from the individuals to whom the data pertains’ was required to register with the Texas Secretary of State by March 1, 2024. Tex. Bus. & Com. Code §§ 509.003(a)(2), 509.005; Tex. Admin. Code § 106.3(c)... Arity Defendants failed to register with the Texas Secretary of State’s Office by March 1, 2024.”
Allstate and Arity (All Defendants)
Count 3: Unfair Methods of Competition and Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices in the Business of Insurance, Tex. Ins. Code §§ 541.001 et seq.
“Defendants engaged in several acts and practices in the business of insurance that, alone and in conjunction with each other, constitute unfair and deceptive acts and practices, including by ‘failing to verify’ consumers’ consent before purchasing driving-related data from vehicle manufacturers, ‘turning a blind eye to the strong possibility that consumers did not consent to \[their] collection and sale’ of their sensitive and/or non-anonymized data to Insurers, using the unlawfully obtained data for Defendants’ own car insurance underwriting processes, and marketing and advertising the data to Insurers as ‘driving behavior’ data.

Here are the attestations for this use case in a JSON list (these would be stored in a server). Note that we omitted dataAuthorization or disclosure attestations here to save time as we were writing all of this by hand, but they would be here (a disclosure initiated by GasBuddy to Arity and eventually Allstate)

\[
{
"timestamp": "05/23/2025 19:49:00",
"id": 4,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create",
"identifier": "mailto:jane.smith@gmail.com"
},
"body": "Identification created for Jane Smith"
},
{
"timestamp": "01/23/2025 19:00:00",
"id": 100,
"party": "AllState",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create",
"identifier": "https://www.allstate.com/"
},
"body": "Identification created for Allstate"
},
{
"timestamp": "01/23/2025 19:00:00",
"id": 101,
"party": "Arity",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create",
"identifier": "https://www.arity.com/"
},
"body": "Identification created for Arity"
},
{
"timestamp": "01/23/2025 19:00:00",
"id": 102,
"party": "GasBuddy",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#identification-create",
"identifier": "https://www.gasbuddy.com/"
},
"body": "Identification created for GasBuddy"
},
{
"timestamp": "08/23/2025 19:00:00",
"id": 103,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-introduce",
"subject": 4,
"controller": 100
},
"body": "Jane Smith introduces Allstate to Mytrace"
},
{
"timestamp": "08/23/2025 19:01:00",
"id": 104,
"party": "Allstate",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-acknowledge",
"subject": 4,
"controller": 100,
"introduction": 103
},
"body": "Allstate agrees to use MyTrace to trace data interactions with Jane Smith"
},
{
"timestamp": "09/06/2025 18:30:00",
"id": 105,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-introduce",
"subject": 4,
"controller": 101
},
"body": "Jane Smith introduces Arity to Mytrace"
},
{
"timestamp": "09/06/2025 18:31:00",
"id": 106,
"party": "Arity",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-acknowledge",
"subject": 4,
"controller": 101,
"introduction": 101
},
"body": "Arity agrees to use MyTrace to trace data interactions with Jane Smith"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/01/2025 18:30:00",
"id": 107,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-introduce",
"subject": 4,
"controller": 102
},
"body": "Jane Smith introduces GasBuddy to Mytrace"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/01/2025 18:31:00",
"id": 108,
"party": "GasBuddy",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#introduction-acknowledge",
"subject": 4,
"controller": 102,
"introduction": 107
},
"body": "GasBuddy agrees to use MyTrace to trace data interactions with Jane Smith"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/01/2025 18:32:00",
"id": 109,
"party": "GasBuddy",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#data-define",
"dataType": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/#:~:text=user.telemetry,sensors%20and%20monitoring.",
"dataTypeOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_categories/",
"controller": 102,
"subject": 4,
"start": "10/01/2025 18:32:00",
"end": "10/01/2026 18:32:00"
},
"body": "GasBuddy defines a dataset comprising the next 12mo of telemetry data from Jane Smith’s phone."
},
{
"timestamp": "10/01/2025 18:33:00",
"id": 110,
"party": "GasBuddy",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#term-define",
"data": 109,
"purpose": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=application%2C%20or%20system-,functional.service,Functions%20relating%20to%20provided%20services%2C%20products%2C%20applications%20or%20systems.,-functional.service.improve",
"purposeOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/"
},
"body": "GasBuddy defines a term to use the next 12mo of telemetry data from Jane Smith’s phone for the functional service of a fuel efficiency score"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/01/2025 18:33:00",
"id": 111,
"party": "GasBuddy",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#term-define",
"data": 109,
"purpose": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=communications%20and%20outreach.-,third\_party\_sharing,data%20to%20third%20parties%20outside%20of%20the%20system%20or%20service%27s%20scope.,-train\_ai\_system",
"purposeOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/"
},
"body": "GasBuddy defines a term to use the next 12mo of telemetry data from Jane Smith’s phone for third party sharing"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/01/2025 18:34:00",
"id": 112,
"party": "GasBuddy",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-request",
"controller": 102,
"subject": 4,
"terms": \[110,111],
"expiry": "10/01/2026 18:34:00"
},
"body": "GasBuddy requests consent from Jane."
},
{
"timestamp": "10/01/2025 18:35:00",
"id": 113,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-accept",
"consent": 112,
"controller": 102,
"subject": 4
},
"body": "Jane Smith accepts consent from GasBuddy"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/08/2025 18:35:00",
"id": 114,
"party": "GasBuddy",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use",
"basis": 113,
"data": 109,
"subject": 4,
"operation": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=application%2C%20or%20system-,functional.service,Functions%20relating%20to%20provided%20services%2C%20products%2C%20applications%20or%20systems.,-functional.service.improve",
"operationOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/"
},
"body": "GasBuddy uses Jane Smith’s data for a functional service (fuel efficiency score)"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/08/2025 18:36:00",
"id": 115,
"party": "GasBuddy",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataReceipt-create",
"subject": 4,
"dataUses": \[114]
},
"body": "updated your fuel efficiency score"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/08/2025 18:37:00",
"id": 116,
"party": "Arity",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use",
"basis": 113,
"data": 109,
"subject": 4,
"operation": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/#:~:text=personalize.profiling,of%20serving%20content",
"operationOntology": "https://ethyca.github.io/fideslang/taxonomy/data\_uses/"
},
"body": "GasBuddy uses Jane Smith’s data for a functional service (fuel efficiency score)"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/08/2025 18:38:00",
"id": 117,
"party": "Arity",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataReceipt-create",
"subject": 4,
"dataUses": \[116]
},
"body": "profiled your driving behavior"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/08/2025 18:39:00",
"id": 118,
"party": "Arity",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#data-define",
"dataType": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#driving-behavior",
"dataTypeOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology",
"controller": 101,
"subject": 4,
"start": "10/08/2025 18:39:00",
"end": "10/08/2026 18:39:00",
"receipt": 117
},
"body": "Arity defines a dataset comprising Jane Smith's driving behavior profile."
},
{
"timestamp": "10/10/2025 18:33:00",
"id": 119,
"party": "Allstate",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#term-define",
"data": 118,
"purpose": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#insurance-underwriting",
"purposeOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "Allstate defines a term to use Jane's driver profile from Arity for insurance underwriting"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/10/2025 18:34:00",
"id": 120,
"party": "Allstate",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-request",
"controller": 100,
"subject": 4,
"terms": \[119],
"expiry": "10/10/2026 18:34:00"
},
"body": "Allstate requests consent from Jane."
},
{
"timestamp": "10/10/2025 18:35:00",
"id": 121,
"party": "Jane Smith",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#consent-accept",
"consent": 120,
"controller": 100,
"subject": 4
},
"body": "Jane Smith accepts consent from Allstate"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/11/2025 18:35:00",
"id": 122,
"party": "Allstate",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataUse-use",
"basis": 121,
"data": 118,
"subject": 4,
"operation": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology#insurance-underwriting",
"operationOntology": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/ontology"
},
"body": "Allstate uses Jane Smith’s data for insurance underwriting"
},
{
"timestamp": "10/11/2025 18:36:00",
"id": 123,
"party": "Allstate",
"context": {
"type": "https://nicolatl.github.io/mytrace-web/docs/1.0#dataReceipt-create",
"subject": 4,
"dataUses": \[122]
},
"body": "raised your monthly insurance payment by $110"
}
]

What are some other potential use cases for this system that could support justice for people?
